https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rh_qR_1jFaQ9ginoZpo09ImyjBh8HWtMVuR1I5d6628/edit?usp=sharing
When a user types www.google.com in their browser which will be the client. The first step will be converting www.google.com to a computer friendly IP address and this will be the address of our server. This is required since web browsers interact through Internet Protocol (IP) addresses.
To do this the user’s Internet Service Provider will first make a DNS Request. This is done through the DNS (Domain Name System). The role of the DNS is to translate domain names into IP addresses. The domain name acts as a simpler version of the address of our servers e.g. www.foobar.com will represent 8.8.8.8. There are 4 DNS servers involved and they are the DNS recursor, Root namesever, TLD (top level domain) server and the Authoritative server.
Once the DNS has made the translation it responds to the web browser with the IP address of the domain requested initially. The browser can then make a HTTP request to this IP address. Just using HTTP requests leaves the network vulnerable and the information can be intercepted and read since it is not encrypted.
To ensure that our communication is secure the web uses an SSL certificate. An SSL certificate is a digital certificate that authenticates a website’s identity and enables an encrypted connection. SSL stands for Secure Sockets Layer, a security protocol that creates an encrypted link between a web server and a web browser. How an SSL certificate works can be broken down into the following steps:
A browser or server attempts to connect to a web server secured with SSL.
The browser or server requests that the web server identifies itself.
The web server sends the browser or server a copy of its SSL certificate in response.
The browser or server checks to see whether it trusts the SSL certificate. If it does, it signals this to the web server.
The web server then returns a digitally signed acknowledgment to start an SSL encrypted session.
Encrypted data is shared between the browser or server and the webserver
On most web infrastructure there will be a load balancer whose job will be to efficiently distribute network traffic across a group of servers. This is necessary since companies often have more than one server. This helps in scaling up in a cost effective manner, ensures that no one server is overworked, redundancy and improves flexibility.
To help increase security of their web servers Google may have firewalls whose purpose will be to secure their servers and protect them from cyber attacks, preventing unauthorized access of critical data. The firewall will monitor the traffic being sent from the load balancer to the web servers.

